---
layout: post
title: New Year
date: 2025-01-04 15:47 +1300
---

Last year went by very fast, and I feel like I didn't seized every opportunity as I should have. Nor did I do all I could to improve myself in the many aspects of my life. So this year I would love to do better.

Now, this is not about setting up New Year Resolutions or Goals. More about finding a systematic way of improving in the areas I care about. Which are:

1. Family relationships
2. Professional craft and career
3. Physical activity
4. Reading (both fiction and non-fiction)

The key to achieve progress, for my particular personality, is to develop some sense of momentum, avoid procrastinating, and absolutely avoid falling in a state of _all hope is lost_. So, it's about making small incremental steps that are not hard to achieve, yet give me a sense of accomplishment at every step.

Also, I need to make use of my calendar, book time to do these activities. Otherwise, the day just goes by with the mundane requirements of life.

Here are some ideas about what I might do:

- Start the day with some form of physical activity. Like going for a run or swim, or just some strengthening and stretching exercises in the deck.
- Get more involved in pair programming sessions with the team, to stay deeper connected with our codebase.
- Make time for intentional play and family activities.
- Participate in networking events that might lead to professional opportunities in the future.
- Read instead of watching TV. I do quite a bit of this already, but can always get better.

This is not an extensive list, nor meant to be a fully laid out plan. It's more of an intention statement. But lets not confuse that with a "new years resolution" eh 😂.
